# Why hydrogen bond strengths are jazzy?

## Authors

- Gian Marco Ghiandoni
- Eike Caldeweyher

- [DOI:10.1039/D2CP01165D](https://doi.org/10.1039/D2CP01165D)

## Abstract

Hydrogen bonding is an interaction of great importance in drug discovery and development as it may significantly affect chemical and biological processes including the interaction of small molecules with other molecules, proteins, and membranes.
In particular, hydrogen bonding can impact drug-like properties such as target affinity and oral availability which are critical to developing effective pharmaceuticals, and therefore, numerous methods for the calculation of properties such as hydrogen-bond strengths, free energy of hydration, or water solubility have been proposed over time.
However, the accessibility to efficient methods for the predictions of such properties is still limited.
Here, we present the development of Jazzy, an open-source tool for the prediction of hydrogen-bond strengths and free energies of hydration of small molecules.
Jazzy also allows the visualisation of hydrogen-bond strengths with atomistic resolution to support the design of compounds with desired properties and the interpretation of existing data.
The tool is described in its implementation, parameter fitting, and validation against two data sets of experimental hydration free energies.
Jazzy is also applied against two chemical series of bioactive compounds to show that hydrogen-bond strengths can be used to understand their structure–activity relationships.
Results from the validations highlight the strengths and limitations of Jazzy, and suggest its suitability for interactive design, screening, and machine-learning featurisation.

## Resources

- [GitHub](https://github.com/AstraZeneca/jazzy)
- [User documentation](https://jazzy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
